I read poetry all the time and write
about it
frequently and take poems apart to see
how they work because I'm a word person
I understand the world best most fully
in words rather than say pictures or
numbers and when I have a new experience
or a new feeling I'm a little frustrated
until I can try to put it into words I
think I've always been that way I
devoured science fiction as a child I
still do and I found poems by Andrew
Marvell and Matthew Arnold and Emily
Dickinson and William Butler Yeats
because they were quoted in science
fiction and I loved their sounds and I
went on to read about a table ARIMA and
medial scissors and enjambment and all
that other technical stuff that you care
about if you already care about poems
because poems already made me happier
and sadder and more alive and I became a
poetry critic because I wanted to know
how and why now poetry isn't one thing
that serves one purpose any more than
music or computer programming serve one
purpose
the Greek word Palma just means a made
thing and poetry is a set of techniques
ways of making patterns that put
emotions into words the more techniques
you know the more things you can make
and the more patterns you can recognize
and things you might already like or
love that said poetry does seem to be
especially good at certain things for
example we are all going to die poetry
can help us live with that
poems are made of words nothing but
words the particulars and poems are like
the particularity of the personalities
that distinguish people from one another
palms are easy to share easy to pass on
and when you read
you can imagine someone's speaking to
you or for you maybe even someone far
away or someone made up or someone
deceased that's why we can go to Palm
with when you want to remember something
or someone to celebrate or to look
beyond death or to say goodbye and
that's one reason poems can seem
important even to people who aren't me
who don't so much live in a world of
words the poet frank O'Hara said if you
don't need poetry bully for you but he
also said when he didn't want to be
alive anymore the thought that he
wouldn't write anymore poems had stopped
him poetry helps me want to be alive and
I want to show you why by showing you
how how a couple of poems react to the
fact that we're alive in one place at
one time in one culture and in another
we won't be alive at all so here's one
of the first poems I memorized it could
address a child or an adult from far
from Eve and morning from yon 12 winded
sky the stuff of life to knit me blue
hither here am I now for a breath I
tarry nor yet disperse apart take my
hand quick and tell me what have you in
your heart speak now and I will answer
how shall I help you say here to the
winds twelve quarters I take my endless
way now this poem is appealed to science
fiction writers it's furnished at least
three science fiction titles I think
because it says poems can bring us news
from the future or the past or across
the world because their patterns can
seem to tell you what's in somebody's
heart it says palms can bring people
together temporarily which i think is
true and it sticks in my head not just
because it rhymes but for how it rhymes
cleanly and simply on the two and four
say and way with anticipate Ori hints on
the one and three answer and quarters as
if the poem itself were coming together
it plays up the fact that we die by
exaggerating the speed of our lives a
few years on earth become one speech one
breath it's a poem about loneliness the
eye and the palm feels no connection
will last and it might look like a plea
for help till you get to the word help
where this eye facing you taking your
hand is more like a teacher or a genie
or at least that's what he wants to
believe it would not be the first time a
poet had written the poem that he wanted
to hear
now this next poem really changed what I
liked and what I read and what I felt I
could read as an adult it might not make
any sense to you if you haven't seen it
before the garden oleander
coral from lipstick ads in the 50s fruit
of the tree of such knowledge to smack
thin air meaning kiss or hit it appears
in the guise of outworn usages because
we are bad big masculine threat
insinuating and slangy now I found this
poem in an anthology of almost equally
confusing poems in 1989 I just heard
that there were these scandalous writers
called language poets who didn't make
any sense and they wanted to go and see
for myself what they were like and some
of them didn't do much for me but this
writer ray armentrout did an awful lot
and it kept reading her till I felt I
knew what was going on as I do with this
poem it's about the Garden of Eden and
the fall and the biblical story of the
fall in which sex as we know it and
death and guilt come into the world at
the same time it's also about how
appearances deceive how our culture can
sweep us along into doing and saying
things we didn't intend or don't like
and Armentrout style is trying to help
us stop or slow down SMAT can mean kiss
in air kisses as in lip-smacking but
that can lead to smack as in hit as in
domestic abuse because sexual attraction
can seem threatening the red that means
fertility can also mean poison oleander
is poisonous and outworn usages like
smack for kiss or hit can help us see
how our unacknowledged assumptions can
make us believe we are bad either
because sex is sinful or because we
tolerate so much sexism we let guys tell
women what to do the palm reacts to old
lipstick ads and it's edginess about
statement it's reversals and halts have
everything to do with resisting the
language of ads that want to tell us so
easily what to want what to do what to
think that resistance is a lot of the
point of the poem which shows me
Armentrout shows me what it's like to
hear grave threats and mortal dishonesty
in the language of everyday life and
once she's done that I think she can
shell other people women and men what
it's like to feel that way and say to
other people women and men who feel so
alienated or so threatened that they're
not alone now how do I know that I'm
right about this someone confusing pump
well in this case I emailed the poet a
draft of my talk and she said yeah yeah
that's about it yeah but usually you
can't know you you never know you can't
be sure and that's okay all we can do is
listen to poems and and look at poems
and gas and see if they can bring us
what we need and if you're wrong about
some part of a poem nothing bad will
happen
now this next poem is older than
Armentrout but a little younger than AE
Housman s-- the brave man the son that
brave man comes through boughs that lie
in wait that brave man green and gloomy
eyes and dark forms of the grass run
away the good stars pale Helms and spiky
Spurs run
away fears of my bed fears of life and
fears of death run away that brave man
comes up from below and walks without
meditation that brave man now the son in
this poem in Wallace Stevens poem seems
so brave because the person in the poem
is so afraid the Sun comes up in the
morning through branches dispels the do
the eyes on the grass and defeats stars
envisioned as armies brave has its old
sense of showy as well as its modern
sense courage this son is not afraid to
show his face but the person in the poem
is afraid he might have been up all
night that is the reveal Stephen saves
for that fourth stand that were run away
has become a refrain this person might
want to run away - but fortified by the
sun's example he might just rise
Stephens saves that sonically odd word
meditation for the end
unlike the Sun human beings think we
meditate on past and future life and
death above and below and it can make us
afraid poems the patterns and poems show
us not just what somebody's thought or
what someone did or what happened but
what it was like to be a person like
that to be so anxious so lonely so
inquisitive so goofy so preposterous so
brave that's why poems can seem at once
so durable so personal and so ephemeral
like something inside and outside you at
once the Scottish poet Denis Riley
compares poetry to a needle a sliver of
outside I cradle inside and the American
poet Terence Hays wrote six poems called
wind in a box one of the masks tell me
what am I going to do when I'm dead and
the answer is that he'll stay with us or
won't stay with us inside us as wind as
air as words
it is easier than ever to find palms
that might stay inside you that might
stay with you from long long ago or from
right this minute from far away or from
right close to where you live almost no
matter where you live
poems can help you say helps you show
how you're feeling but they can also
introduce you to feelings ways of being
in the world people very much unlike you
maybe even people from long long ago
some homes even tell you that that is
what they can do that's what John Keats
is doing in his most mysterious perhaps
poem it's mysterious because it's
probably unfinished he probably left and
unfinished and because it might be meant
for a character in a play but it might
just be Keats as thinking about what his
own writing his handwriting could do and
in it I hear at least I hear mortality
and I hear the power of older poetic
techniques and I have the feeling you
might have the feeling of meeting even
for an instant almost becoming someone
else from long ago someone quite
memorable
this living hand now warm and capable of
earnest grasping would if it were cold
and in the icy silence of the tomb so
hot by days and chilled I dreaming
nights that thou wouldst wish thine own
heart dry of blood so in my veins read
life might stream again and thou be
conscience calms see here it is I hold
it toward you thanks
[Applause]
[Music]